---
title: "Propositional Logic in Lean4"
date: 2025-07-16
categories: logic formalization
permalink: /posts/2025/07/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - propositional
  - lean4
  - sentiential
---
Let us begin with propositions (typically denoted using capital letters P, Q). Lean4's proof user interface is similar to one that I learned from "Language, Logic, and " by . I highly recommend this book. I will be using the VS Code editor so that the proof is outlined in the InfoView panel (right). As I type Lean4 code in the editor panel (left), the proof state is updated until goal(s) are reached. I will show an example below. Do not worry what it means yet.

Here is an example:
```
TODO: add a gif here
```

Now let's start to fill in the blanks:

# Proof in Lean 4
Let's break down the syntax and semantics of a theorem in Lean4. We will prove theorems in this series:

```
```

The sections of a theorem correspond to:
- Theorem: declares a theorem with a given name
- Domain: specifies the domain (type) in which the terms in the theorem belong to
- Hypotheses: specifies what is given
- Goal: specifies a true claim
- Proof: a sequence of steps that lead to the Goal. These are driven by tactics.

Note: The QED in Lean4 is  and is configurable in Settings.

# Tactics
These are commands that tell Lean4 to construct expressions. They drive the progress of the proof in tactic mode. They can be used in different contexts to add or rewrite the terms in the proof, introduce new goals, solve goals, and more. Here are some common ones that we'll use in this blog post series:
- exact
- have
- constructor
- cases
- left, right
- apply
- intro
- push_neg
- by_contra
- contrapose
- assumption
- tauto
- contradiction

It may be common to look up a tactic but I find asking an AI along with examples of usage easier. So that is the first thing I suggest you do. Fire up Lean4 and start proving your first theorems. In the next blog post, I'll share some that I found useful.

# Blog
Posts that have a lean4 tag will usually have lean4 code that is used to prove something in tactic mode. Rarely will I include the InfoView panel so it will help to try out these examples yourself. The best way to learn is by doing. I will try to keep the posts bite-sized. I reserve the right to edit the posts. You can always check the github repository for the latest updates and the history of each file. Happy proving!